Add settings guide (#122)
hanami/guides: content/v2.0/application/settings.md

---
title: Settings
order: 10
---

> Hanami supports application settings through a `Settings` class, defined in `config/settings.rb`.

Reviewer: I have several thoughts about this very first line 😆 

First, I think it's good to establish a shorthand term for this that we can use throughout all our guides. You're close here with "application settings," but since we call our app an `Hanami::App` and it's defined in app.rb, perhaps "app settings" is better.

We'll also want to make sure we're clear in our language so this is not confused with framework configuration (i.e. `Hanami.app.config` or `SomeSlice::Slice.config`). I think calling these "app config" or "slice config" (i.e. config as distinct from _settings_) would be the way to go.

None of this is immediately applicable to this first line, apart perhaps considering "app" instead of "application" for our vernacular — I'm keen for your thoughts on this, however.

The actual thing I think we can change about this firstly line is to more strongly emphasise that these are _user defined_ settings, so perhaps something like this:

> You can define your own settings for your app through a `Settings` class, defined in `config/settings.rb`.

wdyt?

Author: Yep, excellent distinction to make clear. I've gone with your opening line, followed by:

```
Using this class, you can specify what settings exist within your application, what types and defaults they have, and whether or not they are required for your application to boot.

These "app settings" are unrelated to ["app config"](/v2.0/application/config/), which configure framework behaviours. App settings are your own to define and use.
```

```ruby
# config/settings.rb

# frozen_string_literal: true

module Bookshelf
  class Settings < Hanami::Settings
    # Define your app settings here, for example:
    #
    # setting :my_flag, default: false, constructor: Types::Params::Bool
  end
end
```

Using this class, you can define what settings exist within your application, what types and defaults they have, and whether or not they are required for your application to boot.

> Each setting is read from an environment variable matching its name. For example, with the following configuration, the Redis URL and Sentry DSN are sourced from the `REDIS_URL` and `SENTRY_DSN` environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each setting is read from an environment variable matching its name. For example, with the following settings, the Redis URL and Sentry DSN are sourced from the `REDIS_URL` and `SENTRY_DSN` environment variables.
```

For the same reasons I outlined in my first comment, let's stick to "settings" over "configuration" here whenever we can.

Author: Done, thanks.

```ruby
# config/settings.rb

# frozen_string_literal: true

module Bookshelf
  class Settings < Hanami::Settings
    setting :redis_url, constructor: Types::String
    setting :sentry_dsn, constructor: Types::String
  end
end
```

## Types

Environment variables are strings, but it's convenient for settings like `analytics_enabled` to be a boolean value, or `max_cart_items` to be an integer.

You can coerce settings to these types by specifying the relevant constructor. For example, `Types::Params::Bool` and `Types::Params::Integer` will coerce values to boolean and integer values respectively:

```ruby
# config/settings.rb

# frozen_string_literal: true

module Bookshelf
  class Settings < Hanami::Settings
    setting :analytics_enabled, constructor: Types::Params::Bool
    setting :max_cart_items, constructor: Types::Params::Integer
  end
end
```

We can see this in action in the Hanami console:

```shell
ANALYTICS_ENABLED=true MAX_CART_ITEMS=100 bundle exec hanami console

bookshelf[development]> Hanami.app["settings"].analytics_enabled
=> true

bookshelf[development]> Hanami.app["settings"].max_cart_items
=> 100
```

> Common types that are useful in settings constructors include:

Reviewer: Around this moment it feels like the right time to mention these types come from dry-types and link to dry-types' documentation?

Reviewer: At the same time it might be worth saying that this `Types` module is auto-generated for you when you subclass `Hanami::Settings`.

Reviewer: And should probably also mention that "These types will be available as long as you keep dry-types in your Gemfile" or similar.

```ruby
Types::String
Types::Params::Bool
Types::Params::Integer
Types::Params::Float
Types::Params::Date
Types::Params::Time
```

## Required and optional settings

> Whether or not each setting is required for your application to start is determined by its constructor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether or not each setting is required for your application to boot is determined by its constructor.
```

Let's be consistent with "boot" instead of start?

Author: Adjusted.

If a setting uses a constructor like `Types::String` or `Types::Params::Bool`, then Hanami will raise an exception if the setting is missing, rather than let your application start in a potentially invalid state.

> The below settings configuration will result in a `Hanami::Settings::InvalidSettingsError` when `DATABASE_URL` and `ANALYTICS_ENABLED` environment variables are not set:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The below settings will result in a `Hanami::Settings::InvalidSettingsError` when `DATABASE_URL` and `ANALYTICS_ENABLED` environment variables are not set:
```

```ruby
# config/settings.rb

# frozen_string_literal: true

module Bookshelf
  class Settings < Hanami::Settings
    setting :analytics_enabled, constructor: Types::Params::Bool
    setting :max_cart_items, constructor: Types::Params::Integer
  end
end
```

```shell
bundle exec hanami server

! Unable to load application: Hanami::Settings::InvalidSettingsError: Could not initialize settings. The following settings were invalid:

analytics_enabled:  cannot be coerced to false
max_cart_items: can’t convert nil into Integer
```

The same exception will be raised if a setting can't be correctly coerced:

```shell

> ANALYTICS_ENABLED=true MAX_CART_ITEMS="not coerceable to integer"  bundle exec hanami server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ANALYTICS_ENABLED=true MAX_CART_ITEMS="not coerceable to integer" bundle exec hanami server
```

! Unable to load application: Hanami::Settings::InvalidSettingsError: Could not initialize settings. The following settings were invalid:

max_cart_items: invalid value for Integer(): "not coerceable to integer"
```

To make a setting optional, use `optional` to allow `nil` values:

```ruby
# config/settings.rb

# frozen_string_literal: true

module Bookshelf
  class Settings < Hanami::Settings
    setting :analytics_enabled, constructor: Types::Params::Bool.optional
    setting :max_cart_items, constructor: Types::Params::Integer.optional
  end
end
```

## Default values

Settings can also specify defaults to be used in the absence of the relevant environment variable.

```ruby
# config/settings.rb

# frozen_string_literal: true

module Bookshelf
  class Settings < Hanami::Settings
    setting :redis_url, default: "redis://localhost:6379", constructor: Types::String
    setting :analytics_enabled, default: false, constructor: Types::Params::Bool
    setting :max_cart_items, default: 100, constructor: Types::Params::Integer
  end
end
```

## Constraints

> To enforce additional contraints on settings, you can use a [dry-types](https://dry-rb.org/gems/dry-types) constraint in your constructor.

Reviewer: If we introduce dry-types earlier, then we can instead link directly to dry-types' constraint docs here:

```suggestion
To enforce additional contraints on settings, you can use a [constraint](https://dry-rb.org/gems/dry-types/1.2/constraints/) in your constructor type.
```

Here, the value of the `session_secret` must be at least 32 characters, while the value of the `from_email` setting must satisfy the EMAIL_FORMAT regular expression:

```ruby
# config/settings.rb

# frozen_string_literal: true

module Bookshelf
  class Settings < Hanami::Settings
    EMAIL_FORMAT = /\A[\w+\-.]+@[a-z\d\-]+(\.[a-z]+)*\.[a-z]+\z/i

    setting :session_secret, constructor: Types::String.constrained(min_size: 32)
    setting :from_email, constructor: Types::String.constrained(format: EMAIL_FORMAT)
  end
end
```

> ## Using settings within your application

Reviewer: Perhaps this could be "Using settings within your app and slices", and underneath the example below, we could have an example of how the settings are also available as a `"settings"` component within every slice?

The reason not to do this here is if we planned to have a separate part in the dedicated slices section that covers all the shared components from the app. TBH this might be better, because it helps the other docs like this one remain focused on their main topic.

Author: Yeah, I was of the mind that the settings per slice should go in the slices guide. Given the idea that slices are optional and opt in.

> Hanami makes settings available within your application through a built-in settings provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hanami makes your settings available within your application as a `"settings"` component.
```

```ruby
Hanami.app["settings"]
```

### Accessing settings within components

> To access settings within one of your components, use Hanami's Deps mixin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access settings within one of your components, use the Deps mixin:
```

Do we need "Hanami's" here, since we're already in the Hanami guides? I actually don't know, keen for your thoughts.

Author: Yeah, we don't need Hanami in this case I think. Especially with the link to the docs on it below.

```ruby
# app/analytics/send_event.rb

module Bookshelf
  module Analytics
    class SendEvent
      include Deps["settings"]

      def call(event_type, payload)
        return unless settings.analytics_enabled

        # ...send event to analytics service here ...
      end
    end
  end
end
```

For more information on components and the Deps mixin, see the [architecture guide](/v2.0/architecture/containers/).

### Accessing settings within providers

> When registering a provider, settings can be access via the `target` method, which exposes the application's container:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When registering a provider, you can access the app's settings via the `target`, which returns the app's container:
```

```ruby
# config/providers/redis.rb

# frozen_string_literal: true

Hanami.app.register_provider :redis do
  start do
    require "redis"

    redis = Redis.new(url: target["settings"].redis_url)

    register "redis", redis
  end
end
```

See the guides for [providers](/v2.0/architecture/providers/) and [containers](/v2.0/architecture/containers/) for more information.

### Accessing settings within your app class

> In some cases, you may want to use a setting to inform an application configuration inside your `App` class. Within the `App` class, settings are exposed at the class level for you, via a `settings` method:

Reviewer: Perhaps after the code example we could have a short note saying "Because settings can be accessed at this early point in the app's boot, it's important that the settings file is self-contained, with no dependencies on other code in your app." (Happy for you to finesse the wording)

Author: Thanks - added a note to this effect.
